So our Scripture text for today
discusses the qualities needed
“to walk worthily”
and in a way that pleases Jehovah.
Now, you notice our Scripture text,
Ephesians 4:1, is only a partial sentence.
Let’s read the entire sentence,
which takes in verses 1-3.
Ephesians 4:1-3—he says:
“Therefore I, the prisoner in the Lord,
“appeal to you to walk worthily
of the calling with which you were called,
“with all humility
and mildness, with patience,
“putting up with one another in love,
“earnestly endeavoring
to maintain the oneness of the spirit
in the uniting bond of peace.”
So here the apostle Paul
links ‘walking worthily’ with unity,
and you notice the qualities
that are needed to do that.
He says that we need ‘humility,
mildness, and patience.’
Now, this is not the only time
that the apostle Paul
links these three qualities
with being in unity.
We may remember Colossians 3:12,
and it tells us
to “clothe [ourselves] with . . .
humility, mildness, and patience.”
Why?
So that we can
“continue putting up with one another.”
So why are these qualities
so essential to peace and to unity?
Well, what do the Scriptures say about them?
Well, perhaps we think of the scripture
at Philippians 2:3, 4, which says:
“Do nothing out of contentiousness
or out of egotism,
but with humility
consider others superior to you.”
See, that brings about peace and unity.
Or Proverbs 15:1:
“A mild answer turns away rage.”
Or Proverbs 25:15:
“By patience a commander is won over.”
See, humility, mildness, patience
—these qualities are so vital
for taking tension out of a situation
and allowing for humility
and unity and peace.
Now, there are many accounts in the Bible
that illustrate this fact,
and we’re going to consider just one
—that of the Ephraimites and Gideon.
If you look in your Bibles
in Judges chapters 6 and 7,
it sets out the account
of Gideon going against the Midianites.
We remember that
in response to Jehovah’s direction,
Gideon won against Midian
—first with 32,000 men
and then finally weeded down
to only 300 men.
Now, if you look in your Bibles,
the Study Bible  map B6
helps us to visualize the strategy
that Gideon used with Jehovah’s direction.
Now, the Midianites
gathered near the hill of Moreh,
and you can see that here on the map.
And if you look at Judges 6:34,
we’re reminded
that “Jehovah’s spirit came upon Gideon.”
So here he’s operating
under Jehovah’s spirit.
So, what did he do?
First off, he calls
on the tribes of Manasseh,
Asher, Zebulun, and Naphtali to assist.
And that makes sense
because you can see where those tribes were
in relation to where the fighting was going to be.
Then at Judges 7:22,
Gideon’s initial attack
threw the Midianites into confusion.
And so the Midianites
fled south toward Abel-meholah.
Verse 23 of chapter 7 says
that he then calls on Naphtali,
Asher, and Manasseh
to chase after them and push them
toward the south, further south.
And you can see the logic in that.
But then in an excellent strategy
in verses 24 and 25, to head them off,
he also calls on Ephraim
to capture the waters as far as Beth-barah
and block their escape, and they do.
And they’re successful;
the two main princes of Midian are killed.
It’s victory
—an excellent strategy—
one of the greatest and most courageous
and bravest battles in the Bible.
In fact, interestingly,
there’s no record ever again
of the Midianites bothering Jehovah’s people
after this victory.
Can you imagine having a share in that project,
how excited you would be?
Well, not everybody was.
Look at Judges 8:1;
it says: “Then the men of Ephraim
said to him [to Gideon]:
“‘What have you done to us?
“Why did you not call us
when you went to fight against Midian?’
And they quarreled bitterly with him.”
What was Ephraim’s problem?
Well, they felt they
should have been involved earlier
or that perhaps the situation
should have been handled differently.
‘Why weren’t we involved?
Why didn’t you call us?
‘We didn’t know anything that was going on.
Then we had to drop everything
and come and bail you out.’
Well, did Ephraim
have humility, mildness, and patience?
Well, far from it.
And it was disrupting unity.
Now, how did Gideon respond?
Now, we remember,
Gideon had Jehovah’s spirit
and he had an excellent strategy
that led to an outstanding victory
for Jehovah.
How did he respond?
Well, look at verses 2 and 3.
It says: “But he said to them:
‘What have I done compared with you?
“‘Are not the gleanings of Ephraim
better than the grape harvest of Abiezer?
“‘It was into your hand
“‘that God gave Midian’s princes
Oreb and Zeeb,
“and what have I done compared with you?’
When he spoke this way, they calmed down.”
You see, Gideon showed humility,
mildness, and patience.
The result?
Everyone calmed down,
and Gideon was able
to get on with Jehovah’s work at hand.
Now, we contrast that to the next time
that the Ephraimites pulled the same trick,
as recorded in Judges chapter 12.
There you remember
that they accused Jephthah
of not calling them into battle—same story.
What did Jephthah do?
Well, he says:
‘Well, I did call you into battle,
and you didn’t come,
so I just did it myself.’
The next thing you know,
they’re fighting among themselves,
completely distracted
from carrying on Jehovah’s work.
What’s the lesson?
Well, the lesson is
that things happen at times
that make peace go away.
Sometimes brothers in the congregation,
at Bethel, on a construction site
may react like Ephraimites.
Sometimes we react like Ephraimites.
‘Why didn’t you ask my opinion?
‘I was supposed to be involved in this.
‘Why did you call me last minute when
you knew you needed this two weeks ago,
and now I have to drop everything
and help you out.’
See, that happens; we’re only human.
Well, when it happens, how will we react?
You see, unity is more important
than who is right and who is wrong,
and Gideon understood that simple truth.
And unity is so important today.
There was an interesting,
beautiful Watchtower  article
in 2014, December 15,
and the article was entitled
“Facing the End of This Old World Together.”
And it stated this; it said:
“One of the darkest periods
in human history nears. . . .
For God’s people,
it will be a time for unity.”
It goes on to say:
“During the coming
time of trouble for this system,
we will have to be truly united.”
So let me ask you,
Do you think it’s any coincidence
that here,
where we are in the stream of time,
that we see Jehovah pulling his organization
closer and closer together in unity?
Is it any coincidence
that we hear over and over again
of the need for peace and for unity?
No!
You see, as this world
gets more and more divided,
fragmented, fighting,
we need to pull
tighter and tighter together in unity.
And that requires that all of us
work on these beautiful qualities
of humility, mildness, and patience.
And when there’s a lack of unity,
what do we have to do?
Well, we have to look at ourselves.
You see, generally we find
that the problem is me; it’s us.
Maybe we weren’t consulted
as soon as we should have been.
Or maybe our idea of how the work
or this thing should be done
wasn’t shared by others.
But in the grand scheme of things,
does it really make a difference?
And many times
when we look at a situation afterward
and we pull back unemotionally,
we generally find that, well,
maybe our idea was pretty good,
but the timing wasn’t good.
Or maybe it wasn’t
that great of an idea after all.
Or maybe there was more than one way
for this thing to be handled.
Or perhaps Jehovah’s spirit
was leading things in a different direction.
Well, again, what can help us
to not be an obstacle to unity?
Humility, mildness, patience
—just what we were considering
in Ephesians chapter 4.
You see, we have to have the confidence
that if it’s important to Jehovah,
it’ll happen.
And if not, what a shame it would be
if we become an obstacle to unity
over something
that’s not that important to Jehovah!
You see, brothers and sisters,
we need the “Gideons”
to help us
in our support of the Governing Body.
Gideon was such a beautiful example.
Once he understood Jehovah’s direction,
he was willing to run into the fire
for Jehovah and for his organization.
That’s what we need.
We need “Gideons.”
We don’t need any more “Ephraimites.”
So in harmony with today’s text,
may each one of us walk worthily
in these last days
and work on the qualities
of humility, mildness, and patience.
And if we do,
we will be a uniting force for good
and of Gideonlike value
to Jehovah and the organization
in the troublesome days ahead.